---
title: Python 3 on NAO
author: Emile Kroeger
date: 2023-11-10
category: NAO
layout: post
---

By default; NAO and Choregraphe work with Python 2. It's possible to add Python 3 as an extra package, but note that it will not work in Choregraphe boxes, only in scripts (that can be used in Choregraphe projects to make Python 3 apps).

# Installation

Having Python 3 on your NAO will require installing [the python3nao package](https://cloud.aldebaran-robotics.com/application/python3nao/), which contains Python 3 as well as libraries such as `qi` and `numpy`. You will need an Aldebaran account to be able to install the packages.

# Building applications

NAO Applications are very convenient, they can be linked to dialog, to webpages, they can be started and stopped via Choregraphe, they can be published to [cloud.aldebaran.com](https://cloud.aldebaran.com).

## Starting from a template

As a simple starting point, you can clone this example project:
* [github.com/EmileKroeger/mini_python3_nao_app](https://github.com/EmileKroeger/mini_python3_nao_app)

You can also use [cookiecutter](https://cookiecutter.readthedocs.io/en/stable/) to generate new projects from this template:
* [github.com/EmileKroeger/cookiecutter_naoapp](https://github.com/EmileKroeger/cookiecutter_naoapp)

(this will be more convenient than going around changing the Application name and ID in various places in the project)

## Building or adapting your own

If you want to build your own app, the important part is to include this line in your manifest.xml (adapting to your script):

```xml
 <services>
  <service execStart="/home/nao/.local/share/PackageManager/apps/python3nao/bin/runpy3.sh  scripts/yourscript.py" name="yourappname" autorun="true"/>
 </services>
```

You can use this to build apps and services; you can look at  [robot-jumpstarter](https://github.com/aldebaran/robot-jumpstarter/tree/master) project has some Python 2 templates that could be adapted.


## Installing the app on NAO

You can open these projects with Choregraphe; however there is an issue (as of November 2030) whereby Choregraphe runs a linter on the code that excepts Python 2, and it might recognize some Python 3 syntax as "invalid" and not install the package.

As a workaround, you can install to the robot with [qipkg](http://doc.aldebaran.com/qibuild/beginner/qipkg/tutorial.html), which you can install with `pip install qipkg`.


```
qipkg deploy-package ./app/my_app.pml --url nao@nao.local
```

Note that this requires that your .pml file properly index all the files in your package.

# Usage in command line

If you just want to do command-line usage without the whole application packaging, you can simply execute `/home/nao/.local/share/PackageManager/apps/python3nao/bin/runpy3.sh` to get a python console, or pass your script to that (it can be worth creating a symbolic link).

# API Reference

You can find the API reference [in the official documentation](http://doc.aldebaran.com/2-8/naoqi/index.html) (examples given are for Python 2, often with the older ALProxy-based approach), but the APIs work the same.

# FAQ

## Can I also use it on my computer?

Sure, you can do this without any extra package; just `pip3 install qi` might work (depending of your environment), and if it doesn't, rebuild [libqi-python](https://github.com/aldebaran/libqi-python) from source as explained there.

## Why runpy3.sh?

On NAO, the `PYTHONPATH` environment variable is set to include a folder containing the Python 2.7 version of the qi library; so if you just directly use the `python3` in the package and do `import qi`, it will find the Python 2.7 library first, and fail.

## Isn't Python 3 already installed on the system?

Yes, there is actually already a Python 3.5 installed on NAO, but it does not include `qi` or `naoqi` libraries and so cannot be used for controlling the robot.

## Why doesn't ALProxy work?

ALProxy is part of the deprecated `naoqi` library that is not in the package; use the `qi` library instead, it offers the same functionality (and more) with a slightly different syntax.
